[DOC] Draft release notes for 2.5 (#3733)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/release-notes/v2-5.md

---
title: Version 2.5 release notes
menuTitle: V2.5
description: Release notes for Grafana Tempo 2.5
weight: 35
---

# Version 2.5 release notes

The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 2.5.

This release gives you:

* New features, including more TraceQL metrics, gRPC streaming endpoints, and new experimental vParquet4 block format
* TraceQL enhancements and performance improvements
* Performance and stability enhancements

As part of this release, we’ve updated ownership for `/var/tempo` from `root:root` to a new `tempo:tempo` user with a UUID of `10001`. Learn about this breaking change in Upgrade considerations.

> Read the [Tempo 2.5 blog post](/blog/2024/02/29/grafana-tempo-2.4-release-traceql-metrics-tiered-caching-and-tco-improvements/) for more examples and details about these improvements.

Author: ```suggestion
Read the [Tempo 2.5 blog post](https://grafana.com/blog/2024/05/28/grafana-tempo-2.5-release-vparquet4-streaming-endpoints-and-more-metrics/) for more examples and details about these improvements.
```

* `SearchTagValues`
* `SearchTagValuesV2`
* `MetricsQueryRange`

These new streaming endpoints are not supported by Grafana yet. However, they are supported by the Tempo CLI tool.

In the Tempo CLI, you can use the `--use-grpc` option to enable GRPC streaming.

To learn more, refer to the [Tempo gRPC API](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/#tempo-grpc-api) and [Tempo CLI](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/tempo_cli/#search) documentation. [PR 3460](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3460) [[PR #3584](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3584)]

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
NOTE: Streaming over HTTP requires the `stream_over_http_enabled` flag to be set. For more information, refer to [Tempo GRPC API documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/#tempo-grpc-api).
{{< /admonition >}}

In addition, we’ve reduced memory consumption in the frontend for large traces. [[PR 3522](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3522)]

### New vParquet4 block format (experimental)

New in Tempo 2.5, the vParquet4 block format is required for querying links, events, and arrays and improves query performance relative to previous formats.

> vParquet4 will be the default block format in the next release. [[PR 3368](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3368)]

Reviewer: Maybe not make any promises yet :)

Author: That's actually in Joe's blog post. :)

Author: ```suggestion
[[PR 3368](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3368)]
```

Components such as ingesters and metrics generators that maintain files on disk won't come up cleanly without intervention.
The new user `10001` won't have access to the old files created by `root`.

The ownership of `/var/tempo` changed from `root:root` to `tempo:tempo` with the UID/GID of `10001`.

The `ingester` and `metrics-generator` statefulsets may need to [run chown](https://opensource.com/article/19/8/linux-chown-command) to change ownership to start properly.

Refer to [PR 2265](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/2265) to see a Jsonnet example of an `init` container.

This change doesn’t impact you if you used the Helm chart with the default security context set in the chart.
All data should be owned by the `tempo` user already.
The UID won’t impact Helm chart users.

### Support for vParquet format removed

The original vParquet format [has been removed](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3663) from Tempo 2.5.
Direct upgrades from Tempo 2.1 to Tempo 2.5 are not possible.
You will need to upgrade to an intermediate version and wait for the old vParquet blocks to fall out of retention before upgrading to 2.5. [PR 3663](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3663)]

> vParquet(1) will not be recognized as a valid encoding and cannot read any remaining vParquet blocks.

Reviewer: vParquet(1) won't be recognized as a valid encoding and any remaining vParquet(1) blocks will not be readable

Author: ```suggestion
vParquet(1) will not be recognized as a valid encoding and any remaining vParquet(1) blocks won't be readable.
```

---
title: Version 2.5 release notes
menuTitle: V2.5
description: Release notes for Grafana Tempo 2.5
weight: 35
---

# Version 2.5 release notes

The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 2.5.

This release gives you:

* New features, including more TraceQL metrics, gRPC streaming endpoints, and new experimental vParquet4 block format
* TraceQL enhancements and performance improvements
* Performance and stability enhancements

As part of this release, we’ve updated ownership for `/var/tempo` from `root:root` to a new `tempo:tempo` user with a UUID of `10001`. Learn about this breaking change in Upgrade considerations.

Read the [Tempo 2.5 blog post](/blog/2024/02/29/grafana-tempo-2.4-release-traceql-metrics-tiered-caching-and-tco-improvements/) for more examples and details about these improvements.

These release notes highlight the most important features and bugfixes. For a complete list, refer to the [Tempo changelog](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/releases).

{{< youtube id="c4gW9fwkLhc" >}}

## Features and enhancements

The most important features and enhancements in Tempo 2.5 are highlighted below.
### Additional TraceQL metrics (experimental)

> In this release, we’ve added several [TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/next/operations/traceql-metrics/). Tempo 2.4 introduced the `rate()` function to view rates of spans. For this release, we’ve added `quantile_over_time` and `histogram_over_time`. [PR 3605](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3605), [PR 3633](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3633), [PR 3644](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3644)]

Author: ```suggestion
In this release, we’ve added several [TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/traceql-metrics/). Tempo 2.4 introduced the `rate()` function to view rates of spans. For this release, we’ve added `quantile_over_time` and `histogram_over_time`. [PR 3605](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3605), [PR 3633](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3633), [PR 3644](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3644)]
```

> You can use allowing users to aggregate numerical values, such as the all-important span duration. Notice that you can specify multiple quantiles in the same query.

Reviewer: You can use `quantile_over_time` to aggregate numerical values
?

Author: Good catch!

![Example `quantile_over_time`](/media/docs/tempo/traceql/traceql-quantile-over-time.png)

You can use `historgram_over_time` to display the metrics as a heatmap.

![Example `histogram_over_time`](/media/docs/tempo/traceql/traceql-historgram-over-time.png)

Note that using TraceQL metrics may require additional system resources.

> For more information, refer to the [TraceQL metrics queries](docs/sources/tempo/traceql/metrics-queries) and [Configure TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/next/operations/traceql-metrics/).

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to the [TraceQL metrics queries](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/traceql/metrics-queries) and [Configure TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/traceql-metrics/).
```

The Tempo API endpoints now support gRPC streaming for tag queries and metrics.
We’ve added new streaming endpoints for:

* `SearchTags`
* `SearchTagsV2`
* `SearchTagValues`
* `SearchTagValuesV2`
* `MetricsQueryRange`

These new streaming endpoints are not supported by Grafana yet. However, they are supported by the Tempo CLI tool.

In the Tempo CLI, you can use the `--use-grpc` option to enable GRPC streaming.

To learn more, refer to the [Tempo gRPC API](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/#tempo-grpc-api) and [Tempo CLI](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/tempo_cli/#search) documentation. [PR 3460](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3460) [[PR #3584](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3584)]

{{< admonition type="note" >}}
NOTE: Streaming over HTTP requires the `stream_over_http_enabled` flag to be set. For more information, refer to [Tempo GRPC API documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/#tempo-grpc-api).
{{< /admonition >}}

In addition, we’ve reduced memory consumption in the frontend for large traces. [[PR 3522](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3522)]

### New vParquet4 block format (experimental)

> New in Tempo 2.5, the vParquet4 block format is required for using links, events, and arrays and improves query performance relative to previous formats. vParquet4 will be the default block format in the next release. [[PR 3368](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3368)]

Reviewer: is required for querying links, events, and arrays

> New in Tempo 2.5, the vParquet4 block format is required for using links, events, and arrays and improves query performance relative to previous formats. vParquet4 will be the default block format in the next release. [[PR 3368](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3368)]

Author: ```suggestion
New in Tempo 2.5, the vParquet4 block format is required for querying links, events, and arrays and improves query performance relative to previous formats.
vParquet4 will be the default block format in the next release. [[PR 3368](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3368)]
```

In addition, we’ve updated the OTLP schema to add attributes to instrumentation scope in vParquet4.[[PR 3649](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3649)]

While you can use vParquet4, keep in mind that it's experimental. If you choose to use vParquet4 and then opt to revert to vParquet3, any vParquet4 blocks would not be readable by vParquet3.

To try vParquet4, refer to [Choose a block format](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/parquet/#choose-a-different-block-format).

### TraceQL

Unique to Tempo, TraceQL is a query language that lets you perform custom queries into your tracing data.
To learn more about the TraceQL syntax, see the [TraceQL documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/traceql/).

> For information on planned future extensions to the TraceQL language, refer to [future work](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/traceql/architecture/).

Reviewer: I think this is a better link https://github.com/grafana/tempo/blob/main/docs/design-proposals/2023-11%20TraceQL%20Extensions.md

Author: Excellent! I didn't realize that that link was available.

Author: ```suggestion
For information on planned future extensions to the TraceQL language, refer to [future work](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/blob/main/docs/design-proposals/2023-11%20TraceQL%20Extensions.md).
```

We’ve made the following improvements to TraceQL:

* Add support for scoped intrinsics using a colon (`:`). The available scoped intrinsics are trace:duration, trace:rootName, trace:rootService, span:duration, span:kind, span:name, span:status, span:statusMessage. [[PR [3629](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3629)]
* Performance improvements on TraceQL and tag value search. [[PR 3650](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3650),[PR 3667](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3667)]
* Add `nestedSetLeft/Right/Parent` intrinsics to TraceQL. [[PR 3497](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3497)]

> * Reduced memory usage and improved performance when working with large datasets with many repeated strings. [[PR 3411](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3411)]

Reviewer: i know we wrote this together but now I'm thinking... should this match the other points and say "reduce and improve" instead of past tense?

Author: ```suggestion
* Reduce memory usage and improve performance when working with large datasets with many repeated strings. [[PR 3411](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3411)]
```

When [upgrading](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/setup/upgrade/) to Tempo 2.5, be aware of these considerations and breaking changes.

### Docker image runs as new UID 10001

The Tempo process in the [official Docker image](https://hub.docker.com/r/grafana/tempo/tags) used to run as `root`. The Tempo process now runs as UID `10001` in the Docker image.

Components such as ingesters and metrics generators that maintain files on disk won't come up cleanly without intervention.
The new user `10001` won't have access to the old files created by `root`.

The ownership of `/var/tempo` changed from `root:root` to `tempo:tempo` with the UID/GID of `10001`.

The `ingester` and `metrics-generator` statefulsets may need to [run chown](https://opensource.com/article/19/8/linux-chown-command) to change ownership to start properly.

Refer to [PR 2265](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/2265) to see a Jsonnet example of an `init` container.

This change doesn’t impact you if you used the Helm chart with the default security context set in the chart.
All data should be owned by the `tempo` user already.
The UID won’t impact Helm chart users.

### Support for vParquet format removed

> The original vParquet format [has been removed](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3663) from Tempo 2.5.

Reviewer: one of these paragraphs are not supposed to be here right?

Author: Yes, the ones underneath this area. Good catch.

Direct upgrades from Tempo 2.1 to Tempo 2.5 are not possible.
You will need to upgrade to an intermediate version and wait for the old vParquet blocks to fall out of retention before upgrading to 2.5. [PR 3663](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/3663)]

> In the last release, vParquet (the first version) was deprecated and blocked from writes.
> The original block format is removed entirely in Tempo 2.5.

Author: ```suggestion
```
